[Music]
seven psychological effects that work on
anybody the human mind though
beautifully complex and enigmatic is
sometimes just flat-out weird it
encourages people to do completely
illogical things makes them believe in
some nonsense and even alters their
memories however no decision is made out
of the blue so what drives us to do what
we do well a lot of the time one of
these seven psychological effects are to
blame they have the power to control a
lot of your actions but we'll give you
some tips on how not to fall under their
spell 7 the social facilitation effect
also known as the audience effect this
basically means that people tend to act
differently depending on whether they're
alone or in the presence of others it's
interesting that in the second case they
perform better if the task at hand is
simple or familiar and worse if they
have to do something new or pretty
complicated
you might slurp spaghetti like a slob on
your home alone but try to eat more
neatly and pretty when you're out with
someone else
what's more the way a person acts
depends not only on their social circle
but also on the number of unwitting
bystanders so for instance a man might
offer somebody his seat on the bus just
to impress an attractive woman nearby
how not to fall for this effect ask
yourself from time to time am i doing
this simply to make somebody like or
notice me or because it's what I really
want and be honest
six the Hawthorne effect also known as
the observer effect this phenomenon
happens when people modify their
behavior if they know they're being
watched when you're involved in
something new and are interested in some
experiment you subconsciously act in a
more eager or enthusiastic way in this
case while the results are most likely
to turn out positive unfortunately
they're inaccurate and don't truly
reflect the real situation for example
at the supermarket you're offered to try
some new peanut butter or something and
to give your thoughts on it right then
and there you praised this new product
highly and seemingly genuinely that's
why you end up buying it but once you
get home you realize it's nothing to
write home about it's peanut butter how
not to fall for this effect try to keep
your mind clear and stay critical taking
part in a questionnaire or survey
doesn't automatically mean that you're
supposed to give a positive review of
the product just because somebody
considered you an expert in this
particular field five the Zeigarnik
effect this psychological effect states
that people are better at remembering
information or events that were left
incomplete or unfinished for example a
waiter has your order memorized until he
serves it to you and then he forgets
about it and switches to other tasks or
imagine a young woman who is especially
upset by a recent breakup with her
boyfriend because she'd already started
but hadn't finished the process of
planning their wedding and picking out
her perfect dress Oh
how not to fall for this effect the best
way to get something off your brain
especially if it's bugging you is to
always finish what you've started if
there's no way you can do that in real
life like our poor bride the be for
example then do it in your head imagine
an alternative finale that will dot the
i's and cross the t's this will be much
better than constantly torturing
yourself with never-ending what-ifs for
the Veblen effect Veblen goods are those
objects of luxury the demand for which
increases the higher their price goes
for anybody that knows anything about
basic economics you are probably
thinking wait demand is supposed to
increase as prices go down who in their
right mind would want something more if
it keeps getting more expensive well
allow me to present to you the veiling
effect in a nutshell it's an
economically unfounded demand for
extremely expensive goods this effect is
quite common among young people whose
social status is of utmost importance to
them they perceive discounted goods and
sales almost as if they're flawed or
achy how not to fall for this effect if
you're a slave to the constant new
release of some phone or luxury bag or
whatever then you've already fallen into
this trap every time you buy something
really expensive try to be honest with
yourself and ask am i paying for the
quality or the oohs and ahhs of people
around me 3 the pratfall effect
according to this effect people who make
silly mistakes or even sometimes look
funny seem more attractive and charming
perfection in turn keeps other people at
arm's length and even irritates them
however there's one important thing to
take into consideration here this effect
is true only for those people who
usually perform well if a highly
competent person makes a slip people
start to like them even more on the
other hand if a mistake is made by
someone who's considered a constant
klutz or incompetent the reaction is
negative how to use this effect to your
advantage don't be afraid to look clumsy
or do something stupid in fact this will
only make you cuter and more relatable
these kinds of people seem more
approachable than those who strut down
the street like royalty to the spotlight
effect this phenomenon makes people
believe that others notice them more
than they really do it's exactly this
psychological effect that makes you feel
paranoid like everybody's looking at you
and judging you for all your mistakes or
flaws if a girl has forgotten to apply
mascara to one eye
she'll be 100 percent sure that every
passing stranger has noticed this and is
mentally roasting her for her
absent-mindedness if you think about the
fundamental idea of this effect it's
crystal clear every person feels that
they're the center of their own world so
it's natural for everybody to believe
that other people deem them extremely
important as well a team of scientists
from Cornell University asked a group of
people to put on t-shirts with silly
prints and to guess how many strangers
would notice it in the end their
estimation turned out to be 2 times
higher than the real number of people
who had paid attention to the foolish
t-shirts how not to fall for this effect
not nearly as many people as you think
actually notice your mishaps because
they're all too busy worrying about
themselves if you have a coffee stain on
your shirt or a big zit on your cheek
don't focus on it so much after all do
you pay much attention to those around
you I'd say no not really
one the bystander effect also called
bystander apathy this one is the most
important item on our list hence why
it's at the top this effect says that
people are less likely to provide help
to a victim if there are others present
and the more people there are the less
likely someone is going to reach out a
helping hand if there are a lot of
people gathered in one place and someone
needs assistance each of them believes
that somebody else will come to the
rescue
so nobody helps how to prevent this from
happening to you if you suddenly feel
unwell in a public place and you need
help ASAP don't address the whole crowd
by shouting help or call 9-1-1 choose
one specific person this way you'll have
better chances of being heard and
getting the help that you need have you
ever observed or participated in
situations where these psychological
effects came into play tell us in the
comments below and don't forget to hit
that subscribe button to stay on the
bright side of life
[Music]
you